:title: "From 0 to 10K"
:date: 2013-12-08
:slug: from-0-to-10k
:description: How running has changed me


I've been wanting to write about my running goals for a long time.
For the past 6 months or so I've been running 3-4 times a week, so I wanted to share the experience I get from it, and how it has changed my life, for good.

I've always been the kind of guy sitting at home playing videogames or reading about the latest developer news. I've been going to the gym, but never did any cardio excercises. Going out to run a few kilometers was never an option, I was never a sports guy and had the feeling I'd get really frustrated and exhausted easily and wouldn't be able to run much.

I have no idea what was going through my mind at that time, or what happened that I actually decided to give running a try.

The first day I started running really fast and without really thinking, 1K after I was exhausted and had to walk back home, lesson learned. The next day I ran a bit slower and got to 2K. Again, I was exhausted and just walked my way back. It took probably 2 or 3 weeks for me to increase a kilometer, but a few months later I got to 10K. That was one of the happiest days for me.

Now I'm running 10K 3-4 times a week and try to go to some of the 10K races which take place in Montevideo. It usually takes me around 52 minutes to run 10K, I'm more than happy with it and don't expect to reduce that number. Many people try to convince me to start running faster or to go to bigger races like 21K or marathons, but to me 10K is more than enough. I run because it makes me healthier, I can walk up and down the stairs of my house as if nothing happened and my weight went from 70 to 60 kilos. I don't pretend to make running a big part of my life, but I do expect it to make it longer.

I wrote this post to inspire others to try it out. At first it might seem really hard to start, but once you finish your running session, no matter how much you run, it feels great.
